Add Builder extension spec (#193)
buildpacks/spec: extensions/builder.md

> # Builder

Author: 557b34f

> A **builder** is an image that MUST contain an implementation of the lifecycle, and build-time environment, and MAY contain buildpacks. Platforms SHOULD use builders to ease the build process.

Author: It seems possible for a user to want a builder to just be the execution environment, without any explicit buildpacks (those could be provided with `--buildpack` to `pack`). Is that something we would want to support, or should I make this "MUST contain buildpack blobs" as well?

Reviewer: We should definitely allow builders that do not contain buildpacks.

Author: 557b34f

## Table of Contents

> 

Reviewer 2: @ekcasey is this resolved or are you thinking of something else here?

> ## Required File/Directories

Reviewer: We should require the all specified directories, app dir, platform dir, layers dir, cache dir and are writable by the stack's User.

Author: Resolved in 557b34f

A builder MUST have the following directories/files:
- `/cnb/order.toml` &rarr; As defined in the [platform specification][order-toml-spec]

> - `/cnb/stack.toml` &rarr; As defined in the [platform specification][stack-toml-spec]

Reviewer: We should think about what happens when a builder contains a lifecycle that can support multiple platform APIs but we make a non-additive change to the schemas of these files between platform API versions.

Maybe we want to do something like `/cnb/<platform-api>/order.toml` and the lifecycle can choose the default based on the current API?

Author: Hmm. Would a change like that need an RFC? At the very least, to broadcast to builder creators. 

I personally don't think we would need to preface the directory with `<platform-api>` at this point, but I'm happy to hear push back on that.

Reviewer 2: Is it worth bringing this up during a WG?

Author: It's definitely a change to the builder schema, so it could be helpful. I'd be interested in hearing from builder authors whether they think they will be creating multi-platform api builders or not.

Reviewer 2: @jabrown85 thoughts?

Reviewer 3: I don't think we are actively creating builders for multiple platform versions - it does happen to work with multiple versions. I don't dislike `/cnb/<platform-api>/order.toml` - but maybe suggest `/cnb/order.<platform-api>.toml` if we think we think we need this. Falling back to `/cnb/order.toml` if there are no more specific matches.

This problem is maybe a bit bigger than this RFC though. There are several defaults that reference local filesystem locations that could change between API versions, like defaulting to`/cnb/buildpacks`. If we changed that folder structure in vNext we would would run into similar trouble I think. The folder structure may only match one expected API version. The lifecycle would have to understand old and new structures regardless of the current platform API.

Reviewer 4: Issue created: https://github.com/buildpacks/spec/issues/220

- `/cnb/lifecycle/<lifecycle binaries>` &rarr; An implementation of the lifecycle, which contains the required lifecycle binaries for [building images][lifecycle-for-build].

In addition, every buildpack blob contained on a builder MUST be stored at the following file path:

> - `/cnb/buildpacks/...<buildpack ID>/<buildpack version>/`

Author: I actually didn't have `CNB_BUILDPACKS_DIR` as one of the variables in the RFC. Should I still use it here?

> - `/cnb/buildpacks/...<buildpack ID>/<buildpack version>/`

Author: Resolved in 557b34f

> - `/cnb/buildpacks/...<buildpack ID>/<buildpack version>/`

Reviewer 2: @dfreilich I think it's better to get the right design vs. the RFC design. The RFC is still there to prove out ideas but I fully expect some details may change as we move to implementation.

> ## Environment Variables/Labels

Reviewer: Instead of one `Environment Variables/Labels` section why not have two separate sections?

Author: Resolved in 557b34f

> A builder's environment is the build-time environment of the stack, and as such, MUST fulfill all of the [build image specifications][build-image-specs].

Author: Resolved in 557b34f

> The following variables MUST be set in the builder environment (through the image config's `Env` field):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following environment variables MUST be set on the builder:
```

Author: Resolved in 557b34f

| Env Variable    | Description
|-----------------|--------------------------------------

> | `WorkingDir`  | The working directory where buildpacks should default (eg: `/workspace`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This isn't an environment variable, if we want this, it should go somewhere else. (I am assuming you are referring to WorkingDir as defined in the OCI spec)

Also, I don't think currently set `WorkingDir` on builder images?

Author: I'll take this out. I had put this in the initial RFC, but as you noted on the RFC, it shouldn't matter for platform API 0.5+
https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/116/commits/08b7a1fecf75d69ad21bb04bd6cf9341aa006ba0#r489609978

> | `CNB_APP_DIR`  | Application directory of the build environment (eg: `/app`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `CNB_APP_DIR`  | Application directory of the build environment (eg: `/workspace`)
```
We aren't changing this default are we?

Author: Resolved in 557b34f

| `CNB_LAYERS_DIR`  | The directory to create and store `layers` in the build environment (eg: `/layers`)
| `CNB_PLATFORM_DIR`  | The directory to create and store platform focused files in the build environment (eg: `/platform`)

The following variables MAY be set in the builder environment (through the image config's `Env` field):

| Env Variable    | Description
|-----------------|--------------------------------------
| `SERVICE_BINDING_ROOT`  | The directory where services are bound

The following labels MUST be set in the builder environment (through the image config's `Labels` field):

> | Env Variable    | Description

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Label    | Description
```

Author: Resolved in 557b34f

|-----------------|--------------------------------------

> | `io.buildpacks.builder.api`  | The Builder API this builder implements (at this point, **0.1**)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `io.buildpacks.builder.api`  | The Builder API this builder implements
```
There is no way we don't forget to update that someday

Author: Resolved in 557b34f

| `io.buildpacks.builder.metadata`  | A JSON object representing [Builder Metadata](#iobuildpacksbuildermetadata)
| `io.buildpacks.buildpack.order`  | A JSON object representing the [order of the buildpacks stored on the builder](#iobuildpacksbuildpackorder)
| `io.buildpacks.buildpack.layers`  | A JSON object representing the [buildpack layers](#iobuildpacksbuildpacklayers)

> | `io.buildpacks.lifecycle.version`  | A string, representing the version of the lifecycle stored in the builder (greater than `0.9.0`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `io.buildpacks.lifecycle.version`  | A string, representing the version of the lifecycle stored in the builder
```
We shouldn't reference our lifecycle versions. Theoretically they could use any compliant implementation. Also, why greater than `0.9.0`? Is there some hidden requirement I am missing here?

Author: I think I pulled that from the lifecycle version RFC

> | `io.buildpacks.lifecycle.apis`  | A JSON object representing the [lifecycle APIs](#iobuildpackslifecycleapis) the lifecycle stored in the builder supports

Author: These are currently not formalized in the spec, though there was an RFC for adding them. I assume they should be listed here as well.

Reviewer: yep! they weren't formalized in the spec earlier because there was no builder spec :)

> 

Reviewer: Add a `## Data Format` section.

I also think we should organize consider a `### Labels` sections. We don't currently have any files but we could someday?

Author: Resolved in 557b34f

> ### `io.buildpacks.builder.metadata`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `io.buildpacks.builder.metadata` (JSON)
```
We should include `(JSON)` here and in all the other headings to match the other specs.

Author: Resolved in 557b34f

> The `io.buildpacks.builder.metadata` data should look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
If we add a data format section, I don't think we need these.

Author: Resolved in 557b34f

```json
{

>   "description": "<Some description>",

Reviewer: Can we clean up these example values? The capitalization and format is inconsistent (e.g. `/` vs `-` vs ` `). I would suggest we norm on spaces between words in these sections? (we should clean this up elsewhere as well)

Also, some of these are realistic examples and other are placeholders. I think we should go with placeholders to be consistent with the other specs and then explain what we mean by `<creator-name>` etc. below, if necessary

Author: I tried cleaning it up, but I wasn't sure what to do with some of them (some of the values for `inner buildpack`, for instance). Let me know what you think!

Reviewer 4: Added a few suggestions for making this more consistent.

  "stack": {
    "runImage": {
      "image": "<some/run-image>",
      "mirrors": [
        "<gcr.io/some/default>"
      ]
    }
  },
  "buildpacks": [
    {
      "id": "<buildpack id>",
	  "version": "<buildpack version>",
	  "homepage": "http://geocities.com/top-bp"
	}
  ],
  "createdBy": {
    "name": "<creator of builder>",
    "version": "<version of tool used to create builder>"
  }
}
```

### `io.buildpacks.buildpack.order`

> The `io.buildpacks.buildpack.order` data MUST look like:

Author: As above, should I mention that this could be an empty array, if there are no buildpacks stored on the builder?

Reviewer 4: IDK, to me an empty array is still a JSON object, is that not accurate? Anyway, that would be a really weird builder, so I doubt the call-out is necessary. What do others think?

Author: Alright, so no need to call it out :)

```json
[
	{
	  "group":
		[
		  {
			"id": "<buildpack id>",
			"version": "<buildpack version>",

> 			"optional": "<bool>"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
			"optional": false
```

Author: Resolved in 557b34f

		  }
		]
	}
]
```

### `io.buildpacks.buildpack.layers`

> The `io.buildpacks.buildpack.layers` data should look like:

Author: As above, should I mention that this could be an empty object, if there are no buildpacks stored on the builder?

Reviewer 4: See https://github.com/buildpacks/spec/pull/193#discussion_r610105077

# Builder Specification <!-- omit in toc -->

> This document specified the artifact format for a builder.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This document specifies the artifact format for a builder.
```

A builder is an OCI image that provides a distributable build environment.

A [platform][platform-spec] supporting the builder extension specification SHOULD allow users to configure the build environment with a provided builder.

## Table of Contents <!-- omit in toc -->
- [General Requirements](#general-requirements)
  - [Builder API Version](#builder-api-version)

>   - [File/Directories](#filedirectories)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [Filesystem](#filedirectories)
```
Seems like Filesystem might be a better generic name for this section.

  - [Environment Variables](#environment-variables)
  - [Labels](#labels)
- [Data Format](#data-format)
  - [Labels](#labels-1)
    - [`io.buildpacks.builder.metadata` (JSON)](#iobuildpacksbuildermetadata-json)
    - [`io.buildpacks.buildpack.order` (JSON)](#iobuildpacksbuildpackorder-json)
    - [`io.buildpacks.buildpack.layers` (JSON)](#iobuildpacksbuildpacklayers-json)
    - [`io.buildpacks.lifecycle.apis` (JSON)](#iobuildpackslifecycleapis-json)

## General Requirements

> A **builder** is an image that MUST contain an implementation of the lifecycle, and build-time environment, and MAY contain buildpacks. Platforms SHOULD use builders to ease the build process.

Reviewer 2: Do you dislike the first sentence?

I do think the second sentence the "SHOULD" probably is a "MAY".

> A **builder** is an image that MUST contain an implementation of the lifecycle, and build-time environment, and MAY contain buildpacks. Platforms SHOULD use builders to ease the build process.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A **builder** is an image that MUST contain an implementation of the lifecycle, a build-time environment, and MAY contain buildpacks. Platforms SHOULD use builders to ease the build process.
```

> A **builder** is an image that MUST contain an implementation of the lifecycle, and build-time environment, and MAY contain buildpacks. Platforms SHOULD use builders to ease the build process.

Reviewer 4: Made a suggestion

> A **builder** is an image that MUST contain an implementation of the lifecycle, and build-time environment, and MAY contain buildpacks. Platforms SHOULD use builders to ease the build process.

Reviewer 2: Is it Platforms "SHOULD" or "MAY" use builders to ease the build process?

Author: I think it's MAY, but happy to change it. A platform may decide to just use the lifecycle and stitch everything together themselves. It is harder to have interoperability with builders from other providers ,but that's a design decision for the platform to make.

### Builder API Version
This document specifies Builder API version `0.1`.

Builder API versions:
- MUST be in form `<major>.<minor>` or `<major>`, where `<major>` is equivalent to `<major>.0`
- When `<major>` is greater than `0` increments to `<minor>` SHALL exclusively indicate additive changes

### File/Directories
A builder MUST have the following directories/files:
- `/cnb/order.toml` &rarr; As defined in the [platform specification][order-toml-spec]
- `/cnb/stack.toml` &rarr; As defined in the [platform specification][stack-toml-spec]
- `/cnb/lifecycle/<lifecycle binaries>` &rarr; An implementation of the lifecycle, which contains the required lifecycle binaries for [building images][lifecycle-for-build].

In addition, every buildpack blob contained on a builder MUST be stored at the following file path:

> - `/cnb/buildpacks/...<buildpack ID>/<buildpack version>/`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `<$CNB_BUILDPACKS_DIR>/<buildpack ID>/<buildpack version>`
```

> - `<CNB_BUILDPACKS_DIR>/buildpacks/...<buildpack ID>/<buildpack version>/`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `<CNB_BUILDPACKS_DIR>/<buildpack ID>/<buildpack version>/`
```

Reviewer 4: Looking here: https://github.com/buildpacks/spec/blob/main/platform.md#inputs it doesn't seem the extra directory is there.

If the buildpack ID contains a `/`, it MUST be replaced with `_` in the directory name.

> All specified files and directories are writeable by the build environment's User. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `CNB_APP_DIR` and `CNB_LAYERS_DIR` SHOULD be writeable by the build environment's User.
```

Reviewer 4: Suggested as SHOULD since I don't think it's required (the lifecycle will change permissions on those directories). Maybe we want it to be a MUST though?

Reviewer: It would be nice to get the lifecycle out of the chowning business in my opinion, which we could do if it was gauranteed that this directory is writable by the build user.

> All specified files and directories are writeable by the build environment's User. 

Reviewer: Do we want buildpacks to have permission to change the `order.toml` or the code of other buildpacks? The files above are all currently root owned in builders created by `pack`.

We do want the layers dir and app dir to be writable by the build user however and should probably call that out explicitly.

Author: I would assume that it definitely shouldn't be able to change the code of other buildpacks (except perhaps stackpacks). 

So should I change this to something like:
```
The `CNB_APP_DIR` and `CNB_LAYERS_DIR` are writeable by the build environment's User.
```
?

Reviewer 4: Made a suggestion...

### Environment Variables
A builder MUST be an extension of a build-image, and MUST retain all specified environment variables and labels set on the original build image, as specified in the [platform specifications][build-image-specs].

> The following environment variables MUST be set on the builder (through the image config's `Env` field):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following environment variables MAY be set on the builder (through the image config's `Env` field):
```

| Env Variable       | Description                                                                                         |
| ------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `CNB_APP_DIR`      | Application directory of the build environment (eg: `/workspace`)                                   |
| `CNB_LAYERS_DIR`   | The directory to create and store `layers` in the build environment (eg: `/layers`)                 |

> | `CNB_PLATFORM_DIR` | The directory to create and store platform focused files in the build environment (eg: `/platform`) |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `CNB_PLATFORM_DIR` | The directory to create and store platform focused files in the build environment (e.g.: `/platform`) |
```

> | Env Variable       | Description                                                                                         |
> | ------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
> | `CNB_APP_DIR`      | Application directory of the build environment (eg: `/workspace`)                                   |
> | `CNB_LAYERS_DIR`   | The directory to create and store `layers` in the build environment (eg: `/layers`)                 |
> | `CNB_PLATFORM_DIR` | The directory to create and store platform focused files in the build environment (eg: `/platform`) |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Env Variable       | Description                                                                       | Default |
| ------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------- |
| `CNB_APP_DIR`      | Application directory of the build environment                                    | `/workspace` |
| `CNB_LAYERS_DIR`   | The directory to create and store `layers` in the build environment               | `/layers` |
| `CNB_PLATFORM_DIR` | The directory to create and store platform focused files in the build environment | `/platform` |
```

Author: d269637

> | `CNB_PLATFORM_DIR` | The directory to create and store platform focused files in the build environment | `/platform` |

Reviewer 3: Agreed. I think a `MAY` is correct here. The heroku builders, for instance, do not currently set these but I would hope would still be a valid builder image.

> | `CNB_PLATFORM_DIR` | The directory to create and store platform focused files in the build environment | `/platform` |

Reviewer 4: Made a suggestion

> The following variables MAY be set in the builder environment (through the image config's `Env` field):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following variables MAY be set on the builder:
```

Reviewer 4: (to me, this makes it clearer that the distinction with the table above is the optionality)

Author: d269637

> | Env Variable           | Description                            | Default |
> | ---------------------- | -------------------------------------- | ---- |
> | `SERVICE_BINDING_ROOT` | The directory where services are bound | - |
> | `CNB_BUILDPACKS_DIR` | The directory where buildpacks are located | `/cnb/buildpacks` |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Env Variable           | Description                                | Default |
| ---------------------- | ------------------------------------------ | ---- |
| `SERVICE_BINDING_ROOT` | The directory where services are bound     | - |
| `CNB_BUILDPACKS_DIR`   | The directory where buildpacks are located | `/cnb/buildpacks` |
```

Author: d269637

> | `CNB_BUILDPACKS_DIR` | The directory where buildpacks are located | `/cnb/buildpacks` |

Reviewer: Why is this one optional when `CNB_LAYERS_DIR` etc. are not?

Author: I thought that it's a sensible default. I can make it required if you'd like.

Reviewer 4: Since the lifecycle will supply default values for all of these variables if they are not set, I think it's reasonable to list defaults for all of them. Made a suggestion to that effect.

### Labels

> The following labels MUST be set in the builder environment (through the image config's `Labels` field):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following labels MUST be set on the builder image (through the image config's `Labels` field):
```

| `io.buildpacks.builder.api`       | The [Builder API Version](#builder-api-version) this builder implements                                                  |
| `io.buildpacks.builder.metadata`  | A JSON object representing [Builder Metadata](#iobuildpacksbuildermetadata)                                              |
| `io.buildpacks.buildpack.order`   | A JSON object representing the [order of the buildpacks stored on the builder](#iobuildpacksbuildpackorder)              |
| `io.buildpacks.buildpack.layers`  | A JSON object representing the [buildpack layers](#iobuildpacksbuildpacklayers)                                          |
| `io.buildpacks.lifecycle.version` | A string, representing the version of the lifecycle stored in the builder                                                |
| `io.buildpacks.lifecycle.apis`    | A JSON object representing the [lifecycle APIs](#iobuildpackslifecycleapis) the lifecycle stored in the builder supports |

## Data Format
### Labels
#### `io.buildpacks.builder.metadata` (JSON)

```json
{
  "description": "<description>",
  "stack": {
    "runImage": {

>       "image": "<run-image>",

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      "image": "<run image>",
```

Reviewer 4: I think?

      "mirrors": [

>         "<run-image-mirror>"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        "<run image mirror>"
```

      ]
    }
  },
  "buildpacks": [
    {
      "id": "<buildpack ID>",
	  "version": "<buildpack version>",
	  "homepage": "<buildpack homepage>"
	}
  ],
  "createdBy": {
    "name": "<tool name>",
    "version": "<tool version>"
  }
}
```

The `createdBy` metadata is meant to contain the name and version of the tool that created the builder. 

#### `io.buildpacks.buildpack.order` (JSON)

```json
[
	{
	  "group":
		[
		  {
			"id": "<buildpack ID>",
			"version": "<buildpack version>",
			"optional": false
		  }
		]
	}
]
```

> #### `io.buildpacks.buildpack.layers` (JSON)

Reviewer: I noticed that we don't define this label in the distribution spec even though we use it in pack in order to create this label on builders. This feels like an oversight so I created an issue to address it https://github.com/pivotal/kpack/search?q=io.buildpacks.buildpack.layers

Reviewer 2: Is that issue supposed to be on kpack?

Reviewer: whoops, thanks

```json
{
  "<buildpack ID>": {
    "<buildpack version>": {
      "api": "<buildpack API>",
      "order": [
        {
          "group": [
            {

>               "id": "<inner-buildpack>",

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
              "id": "<inner buildpack ID>",
```

>               "version": "<inner-buildpack version>"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
              "version": "<inner buildpack version>"
```

            }
          ]
        }
      ],

>       "layerDiffID": "<diff-ID>",

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      "layerDiffID": "<diff ID>",
```

	  "homepage": "<buildpack homepage>"
    }
  },
  "<inner buildpack>": {

>     "<inner buildpacks version>": {

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    "<inner buildpack version>": {
```

      "api": "<buildpack API>",
      "stacks": [
        {
          "id": "<stack ID buildpack supports>",
          "mixins": ["<list of mixins required>"]
        }
      ],
      "layerDiffID": "<diff-ID>",

> 	  "homepage": "<buildpack-homepage>"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
	  "homepage": "<buildpack homepage>"
```

>           "mixins": ["<list of mixins required>"]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
          "mixins": ["<required mixin>"]
```

>       "layerDiffID": "<diff-ID>",

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      "layerDiffID": "<diff ID>",
```

### File/Directories
A builder MUST have the following directories/files:

> - `<CNB_BUILDPACKS_DIR>/order.toml` &rarr; As defined in the [platform specification][order-toml-spec]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `/cnb/order.toml` &rarr; As defined in the [platform specification][order-toml-spec]
```

> - `<CNB_BUILDPACKS_DIR>/stack.toml` &rarr; As defined in the [platform specification][stack-toml-spec]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `/cnb/stack.toml` &rarr; As defined in the [platform specification][stack-toml-spec]
```

> - `<CNB_BUILDPACKS_DIR>/lifecycle/<lifecycle binaries>` &rarr; An implementation of the lifecycle, which contains the required lifecycle binaries for [building images][lifecycle-for-build].

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `/cnb/lifecycle/<lifecycle binaries>` &rarr; An implementation of the lifecycle, which contains the required lifecycle binaries for [building images][lifecycle-for-build].
```

The following variables MAY be set in the builder environment (through the image config's `Env` field):

| Env Variable           | Description                            | Default |
| ---------------------- | -------------------------------------- | ---- |
| `SERVICE_BINDING_ROOT` | The directory where services are bound | - |

> | `CNB_BUILDPACKS_DIR` | The directory where CNB required files are | `/cnb` |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `CNB_BUILDPACKS_DIR` | The directory where buildpacks are located | `/cnb/buildpacks` |
```
